The Global Financial Crisis of 2008-2009 refers to the massive financial crisis the world faced from 2008 to 2009. The financial crisis took its toll on individuals and institutions around the globe, with millions of American being deeply impacted. Financial institutions started to sink, many were absorbed by larger entities, and the US Government was forced to offer bailouts to keep many institutions afloat.

The crisis, often referred to as “The Great Recession,” didn’t happen overnight. There were many factors present leading up to the crisis, and their effects linger to this day. Let’s take a look at a brief outline of the Global Financial Crisis of 2009-2009.

Summary: 
      The Global Financial Crisis of 2008-2009 is widely referred to as “The Great Recession.”
      It began with the housing market bubble, created by an overwhelming load of mortgage-backed securities that bundled high-risk loans.
     Reckless lending led to unprecedented numbers of loans in default; bundled together, the losses led many financial institutions to fail and require a governmental bailout.
     Efforts to revive the economy were made through the American Recovering and Reinvestment Act of 2009.
The Housing Market Bubble
              The foundation of the global financial crisis was built on the back of the housing market bubble that began to form in 2007. Banks and lending institutions offered low interest rates on mortgages and encouraged many homeowners to take out loans that they couldn’t afford.

             With   all the mortgages flooding in, lenders created new financial instruments called mortgage-backed securities (MBS), which were essentially mortgages bundled together that could then be sold as securities with minimal risk load due to the fact that they were backed by credit default swaps (CDS). Lenders could then easily pass along the mortgages – and all the risk.

           Outdated regulations that weren’t rigorously enforced allowed lenders to get sloppy with underwriting, meaning the actual value of the securities couldn’t be established or guaranteed.
